Ansible is an open-source automation tool used for configuration management, application deployment, and task automation. It simplifies the process of managing a large number of servers (called "nodes" or "hosts") across various environments.

Ansible is agentless. It does not require any special software or agent to be installed on the managed nodes.

Automation tasks are defined in Playbooks, which are written in a simple, human-readable YAML format.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# This is the main Playbook definition
- name: Configure Web Server and Start Service
  hosts: all
  # Run tasks with elevated (root) privileges
  become: yes
  tasks:
    - name: Ensure Apache is installed
      apt:
        name: apache2
        state: present 
    - name: Ensure the Apache service is started and set to start on reboot
      service:
        name: apache2
        state: started  # 'started' ensures the service is running
        enabled: yes    # 'enabled' ensures it restarts after a reboot
    - name: Deploy simple index.html page
      copy:
        content: "<h1>Hello from Ansible! Web server configured.</h1>"
        dest: /var/www/html/index.html
        mode: '0644' # Set file permissions
		
inventory file
[all]
server1 ansible_host=192.168.1.10
server2 ansible_host=192.168.1.11

Terraform provisions the EC2 instance, and Ansible configures the software on that EC2 instance.



----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q1. What is the fundamental difference in Ansible's architecture?
A: Ansible is agentless. It does not require any special software (agent/daemon) to be installed on the managed servers (nodes). It communicates with Linux nodes over standard SSH (and WinRM for Windows).

Q2. What is an Ansible Playbook?
A: A Playbook is a file written in YAML that defines a set of desired configuration states or tasks. It is the core of Ansible automation and is composed of one or more "Plays."

Q3. Explain Idempotency in Ansible.
A: Idempotency means that running the same Playbook multiple times will achieve the same result as running it once. If a resource is already in the desired state (e.g., a package is already installed), Ansible will not attempt to change it again.

Q4. What is the role of the Inventory file?
A: The Inventory file (usually inventory.ini or YAML format) lists all the managed nodes (servers) and organizes them into Groups (e.g., [webservers], [databases]) so that Playbooks can target specific sets of servers.

Q5. What are Handlers, and how are they triggered?
A: Handlers are tasks that only run when explicitly notified by a task. They are primarily used for actions that should happen only after a change, such as restarting a service after a configuration file has been updated.

Q6. What is an Ansible Role?
A: A Role is the standardized, structural way to organize and package related Playbooks, tasks, variables, files, and handlers into a reusable unit. This simplifies complex, multi-environment deployments and promotes shared automation logic.

Q7. What is Ansible Vault, and why use it?
A: Ansible Vault is a security feature used to encrypt sensitive data (passwords, API keys, secrets) within Playbooks and variable files. It ensures that credentials are never stored in plaintext in the repository.

Q8. What is the purpose of become: yes?
A: The become: yes directive is used to enable privilege escalation (equivalent to running as sudo on Linux). It allows Ansible to execute tasks that require root privileges on the managed node.

Q9. What are Ansible Facts?
A: Facts are variables automatically discovered and collected by Ansible from the managed node (server) when a Playbook runs. They contain system information like the operating system, memory, CPU count, and network interfaces.

Q10. What is Dynamic Inventory?
A: Dynamic Inventory is a script or plugin that automatically pulls the list of managed hosts directly from external sources like AWS EC2, EKS, or a CMDB, instead of relying on a manually maintained static file. This is essential for auto-scaling or cloud environments.